# Welcome

Hello and welcome to the last part of our course. You won't learn anything new this time. Instead, you'll have a chance to test your skills.

This part contains **six questions** that cover material from the entire course. No hints for this part!

Are you ready for the final quiz?

### Exercise 1

Create a simple table for an internet forum. Name the table `forum_user`. Include the following columns: `first_name`, `nickname`, `password`, and `description`. The first two columns are up to 25 characters long. The third column is up to 88 characters long. The last column is a longer text.

Remember, this is a PostgreSQL database; the `CLOB` data type isn't supported.

```sql
CREATE TABLE forum_user (
    first_name varchar(25),
    nickname varchar(25),
    password varchar(88),
    description text
);
```

### Exercise 2

XYZ Bank is very unfortunate – they've experienced several acts of embezzlement. They want to keep record of these events. Let's create a table called `fraud` with the following columns: `employee_id` (an integer) and `amount` (a money value with 10 digits altogether, two of which come after the decimal point).

```sql
CREATE TABLE fraud (
    employee_id integer,
    amount decimal(10, 2)
);
```

### Exercise 3

In the American Grand Star Hotel, there are various kinds of rooms. Let's make a table named `room` with these columns:

1. `room_id` – An integer and the primary key, which is always auto-generated as an identity.
2. `door_number` – Exactly three characters.
3. `basic_price` – A money value with 6 digits, of which two are after the decimal point.
4. `sauna_available` – A yes/no field.

```sql
CREATE TABLE room (
    room_id INTEGER GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY,
    door_number char(3),
    basic_price decimal(6, 2),
    sauna_available boolean
);
```

### Exercise 4

The local university wants us to create a table to store exam dates.

Let's make a table called `exam` with the following columns:

1. `exam_id` – An integer number and the primary key, generated automatically by default.
2. `lecture_id` – An integer number.
3. `date_time` – A column with the exact date and time.

```sql
CREATE TABLE exam (
    exam_id INTEGER GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY,
    lecture_id INTEGER,
    date_time timestamp
);
```

### Exercise 5

A smartphone manufacturer needs a very specific way of generating smartphone IDs: the first device's ID should be `100` and each subsequent ID should be incremented by `10`. Create a sequence named `smartphone_seq` to generate all the numbers this way.

```sql
CREATE SEQUENCE smartphone_seq START WITH 100 INCREMENT BY 10;
```

### Exercise 6

A company which organizes mountain trips created the following table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE mountain_range (
  id integer PRIMARY KEY,
  country_id integer,
  name varchar(16),
  highest_point decimal(3, 1)
);
```

They now want to introduce a few changes to the table and need your help!

1. Add the auto-generation of IDs with the option to provide your own values.
2. Extend the `name` column to accept up to 64 characters.
3. Extend the `highest_point` column to accept up to 6 digits, 2 of which should be after the decimal point.

```sql
ALTER TABLE mountain_range ALTER COLUMN id ADD GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY;
ALTER TABLE mountain_range ALTER COLUMN name SET DATA TYPE varchar(64);
ALTER TABLE mountain_range ALTER COLUMN highest_point SET DATA TYPE decimal(6, 2);
```

## Congratulations

Excellent! That was the very last exercise in the entire course – congratulations!

You've just completed the second course in the **Creating Database Structure** track. You've learned what data types are available when creating SQL tables. You've also learned how to work with identities and sequences and how to modify existing columns.

The next course in the track will show you how to add constraints to your tables. This way, your users will only be able to insert certain values into table columns. See you there!